---
title: "Beta decay of neutron-rich nuclei with isomeric states: TAGS measurements for reactor calculations"
date: "2019-06-20 11:30:00 +0000 UTC"
author: "Victor Guadilla-Gomez"
location: "Amphi TEILLAC"
type: "communication-scientifique"
---
_The study of the beta decay of neutron rich niobium isotopes is a rather complicated problem due to the existence, in many cases, of isomeric states close in energy to the ground states. The disentanglement of the beta decays of these levels requires a good separation technique and a well-controlled detection set-up. Many of these niobium isotopes are fission products contributing significantly to the reactor antineutrino spectrum and to the reactor decay heat. Using summation calculations, some of them have been identified as high priority cases to be measured. The reason is that their beta-intensity distributions, ingredients of these summation calculations, are missing or seem affected by a systematic error, the so-called Pandemonium effect, in the evaluated databases. The improvement of these decay data will allow a better understanding of the reactor antineutrino spectrum with the summation method, as well as a more accurate prediction of the reactor decay heat. Total Absorption Gamma-ray Spectroscopy (TAGS) has proven to be a suitable technique to measure beta-intensity distributions without Pandemonium.__A campaign of measurements was carried out in Jyvaskyla with beams provided by the mass separator of the IGISOL IV facility. A precision trap-assisted separation was used, with the JYFLTRAP double Penning trap system. The beta decay of the nuclei extracted from the trap was measured with the Decay Total Absorption gamma-ray Spectrometer (DTAS) in coincidence with a plastic beta detector. In this talk we will present the results for 100Nb and 102Nb, each with an isomeric state 313 keV and 94 keV, respectively. The experimental strategies followed to disentangle the decays of each ground state and isomeric state will be presented, as well as the impact of these results on decay heat and antineutrino spectrum summation calculations._


[Link indico](https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/19061/)




[Slides](https://atrium.in2p3.fr/5d81ada7-a8fb-444f-9a58-d405f14ffa3f)
